Title: Scalable Pairwise Kernel Learning with Stochastic Vec Trick

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.16979v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 02:42:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Scalable Pairwise Kernel Learning with Stochastic Vec Trick 

## Napsu Karmitsa ∗

## , Tapio Pahikkala, Antti Airola 

Department of Computing, University of Turku, FI-20014 Turku, Finland 

## June 16, 2026 

Abstract 

Pairwise learning is a specialized form of supervised learning that focuses on predicting outcomes for pairs of objects. In this work, we introduce SPaiK , a new scalable kernel learning method tailored for pairwise settings. Our approach preserves the expressive power of kernel methods while substantially reducing computational and memory requirements. The key innovation is the 

stochastic generalized vec trick (sGVT), a stochastic extension of the sparse Kronecker product multiplication algorithm, which enables efficient large-scale training with pairwise kernels. By incorporating sGVT, SPaiK makes it possible to apply kernel-based pairwise learning to datasets of a size previously out of reach. We evaluate the performance of SPaiK on seven real-world drug-target affinity datasets and compare the results with state-of-the-art methods in pairwise learning. 

Keywords: Pairwise kernel learning, Zero shot learning, Generalized vec trick, Stochastic opti-mization 

# 1 Introduction 

Pairwise learning tasks — such as drug-target affinity (DTA) prediction [26, 35], recommender systems [13], link prediction [36], and information retrieval [20] — require models that can efficiently exploit relationships between pairs of objects. We call these objects ”drugs” ( d ∈ D ) and ”targets” ( t ∈ T ), which stems with DTA prediction, but the framework applies to any domain where predictions are made over pairs, although different fields often require distinct evaluation protocols (see, e.g., [26, 35]). Figure 1 shows the pairwise learning framework for DTA prediction. Features of observed targets Features of new targets 

> Features of observed drugs
> Features of new drugs
> Unknown labels for pairs with known drugs and new targets
> Unknown labels for pairs with new drugs and known targets
> Unknown labels for pairs with new drug and new target Labels of training pairs Unknown labels

tj

di yi,j 

xi,j = ( di, t j )

Figure 1: Pairwise learning framework for DTA prediction. Currently, neural networks and matrix factorization machines are the two dominant approaches for pairwise learning, particularly in recommender systems, where the goal is to predict labels in the 

> ∗

napsu@karmitsa.fi 

1

> arXiv:2606.16979v1 [cs.LG] 15 Jun 2026

”green area” of Figure 1 [37]. Despite their widespread use, their effectiveness in zero-shot learning 

— corresponding to the ”red rectangle” in Figure 1, where both objects in a pair are unseen during training — remains limited and not thoroughly investigated. Kernel methods have emerged as a strong alternative in these challenging regimes. They are particularly competitive in cold-start scenarios (the ”yellow and orange bars” in Figure 1) and zero-shot learning [27]. Recent studies further suggest that kernel methods can match or even surpass deep neural networks on small datasets [1]. Moreover, large kernel models that decouple model size from dataset size have been proposed to enable training on millions of samples, showing that kernel methods can scale to levels comparable with modern deep learning systems [1, 21, 31]. When both drugs and targets have their own feature representations or kernels — referred to as 

side information and illustrated by the ”purple areas” in Figure 1 — pairwise kernels provide a natural way to model their affinities. The simplest example is the Kronecker product kernel, which explicitly represents all pairwise affinities between features [35]. Constructing this kernel matrix explicitly is computationally infeasible, as its size grows quadratically with the number of pairs. However, efficient matrix-vector multiplication can be achieved using the generalized vec trick (GVT) [3, 35], a sparse Kronecker product algorithm that reduces the cost of such operations from quadratic ( O(n2), where 

n is the number of observed pairs) to a form that scales essentially linearly with the number of drugs and targets ( O(nm + nq ), where m and q are the numbers of unique drugs and targets, respectively). This approach allows pairwise kernel methods to scale to much larger datasets than was previously possible, since typically m, q ≪ n. Nevertheless, the computation of large pairwise kernels can still become a bottleneck, and existing approaches to large kernel models [1, 2, 6, 9, 21, 31] primarily target single-instance kernels without leveraging the structural properties of pairwise kernels. In this work, we introduce the stochastic generalized vec trick (sGVT), a stochastic extension of the GVT for efficient multiplication of Kronecker-product kernel matrices with vectors. Building on sGVT, we further develop SPaiK , a scalable pairwise kernel learning algorithm that combines sGVT with a new stochastic optimizer, the stochastic inexact limited-memory bundle method (StoILMBM), which is based on the inexact nonsmooth optimization solver InexactLMBM [19]. This integration allows SPaiK to train kernel-based pairwise models using mini-batches of pairs, thereby reducing both computational and memory costs while preserving the expressive power of pairwise kernels. We analyze the proposed sGVT and StoILMBM methods, and demonstrate through experiments on real-world datasets that SPaiK achieves accuracy competitive with state-of-the-art approaches while scaling kernel-based pairwise learning to problem sizes that were previously infeasible. An open-source implementation of SPaiK (including sGVT and StoILMBM) is given at https://github.com/napsu/ SPaiK .

# 2 Preliminaries for Pairwise Kernel Learning 

In this section, we provide the theoretical background on pairwise learning problems and kernel-based methods. In addition, we recall GVT [3, 35]. 

## 2.1 Pairwise Learning Setup 

In conventional supervised learning, the task is to infer an unknown function f : X → Y from a set of training samples {(xi, y i)}ni=1 , where each xi ∈ X is an input and yi ∈ Y is its corresponding output. The aim is to construct a prediction function f that generalizes well to unseen inputs x ∈ X . For regression tasks, the output space is typically Y = R, whereas for binary classification it is Y = {0, 1}.In pairwise learning (see, Figure 1), the training data consist of pairs of objects x = ( d, t ) and their associated labels y, which may be real-valued or categorical. The general pairwise kernel learning setting is governed by two assumptions, which characterize the nature of the data and the expected form of the prediction function: 

Assumption 1. (Pairwise Data Assumption) Each object (e.g., drug or target) typically occurs in multiple pairwise samples in the training set. 

Assumption 2. (Nonlinearity Assumption) The prediction function f typically cannot be decomposed into separate functions of the individual components; that is, it generally cannot be written in the form 

f (d, t ) = fd(d) + ft(t) for some functions fd and ft.2Assumption 1 implies, for instance, that the same drug di may appear in multiple pairs ( di, t j )and ( di, t k) with different targets. Assumption 2 reflects the empirical observation that DTA (and other pairwise problems) often depend on complex interaction effects [27]. While additive models are mathematically possible, they fail to capture these interactions adequately in most real-world settings. For instance, under additivity, if f (di, t j ) > f (dk, t j ) for some pair of drugs di and dk, this ordering would have to hold uniformly across all targets tl. In practice, such uniform behavior is rare, as the relative effectiveness of drugs often varies depending on the specific target. We formulate the learning problem as a regularized empirical risk minimization (ERM) task: 

f ∗ = arg min  

> f∈H

, L(p, y ) + λR(f ), (1) where p ∈ Rn are the predicted outputs and y ∈ Rn the corresponding correct outputs for the training set, L is a non-negative convex loss function, R is a regularization term, and λ > 0 is a regularization parameter. The function class H is the hypothesis space. A standard choice for problem (1) is ridge regression (regularized least squares, RLS), with the squared error loss L(p, y ) = ∥y − p∥2, Euclidean norm regularization λR(f ) = λ 

> 2

∥f ∥2

> H

, and the repro-ducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) as the hypothesis space H [29]. In this work, however, we use the 

ε-insensitive squared loss 

L(p, y ) = 12n

> n

X

> i=1

max  0, (pi − yi)2 − ε , (2) where ε > 0, together with ℓ1 regularization. This choice is motivated by both practical and empirical considerations. Since our underlying optimization solver, StoILMBM, is designed for nonsmooth op-timization (see, e.g., [4]), the nonsmoothness of the loss and regularizer is not a limitation. Moreover, previous experiments on sparse pairwise kernel learning [17] showed that models trained using the 

ε-insensitive squared loss achieved slightly higher accuracy and faster convergence than those trained with the standard squared loss. In addition, although sparsity is not the primary goal here, the ℓ1-norm tends to produce sparser solutions, which has been observed [17] to improve performance in challenging cold-start and zero-shot settings. 

## 2.2 Kernel-Based Formulation 

Kernel methods offer a flexible framework for learning nonlinear functions by mapping input data into high-dimensional feature spaces [3, 14]. When each component of a pair — such as drug and target — has its own feature representation or kernel function, we can define a pairwise kernel that operates on the product space. A straightforward construction is to concatenate the individual feature vectors and apply a standard kernel (e.g., polynomial kernel). However, the Kronecker product kernel is the simplest kernel that models actual pairwise interactions between drug and target features [35]. This kernel enables learning models that generalize to new pairs involving entirely unseen objects — a scenario known as zero-shot learning [3] (the ”red rectangle” in Figure 1). Let kD : D × D → R and kT : T × T → R be positive semidefinite kernels for drugs and targets, respectively. The Kronecker product kernel kD,T : ( D × T ) × (D × T ) → R on pairs ( d, t ) ∈ D × T is defined as 

kD,T (( d, t ), (d′, t ′)) = kD (d, d ′) · kT (t, t ′).

In addition, let K ∈ Rn×n denote the pairwise Kroneker product kernel matrix for all n training pairs, with entries 

Ki,j = kD,T (( di, t i), (dj , t j )) i, j = 1 , . . . , n. 

Then, under the representer theorem [32], the minimizer f ∗ of (1) admits the representation 

f (d, t ) = 

> n

X

> i=1

ai kD,T (( di, t i), (d, t )) ,

where a ∈ Rn are dual coefficients. Additionally, predictions for the training data can be compactly written as p = Ka [35]. Assumption 1 implies that n ≫ m + q with m and q denoting the number of unique drugs and targets, respectively. This fact is used to develop computational short-cuts tailored specifically to 3pairwise kernel learning problems in [3, 35]. More precisely, the large kernel matrix K needs not be computed explicitly but the matrix-vector product Ka can be computed implicitly in O(nm +nq ) time using a GVT — a sparse Kronecker product multiplication algorithm — introduced in [3]. 

## 2.3 Generalized Vec Trick 

We start this section by giving a computational shortcut called Vec Tric (Roth’s column lemma [30]). Let M ∈ Ra×b, Q ∈ Rb×c, and N ∈ Rc×d. Then (N ⊤ ⊗ M )vec( Q) = vec( M QN ), (3) where vec( A) ∈ Rab ×1 is the vectorization of A ∈ Ra×b obtained by stacking all the columns of A in order starting form the first. In practice, computing the vectorized form in (3) is much more efficient, as it avoids the direct computation of the large Kronecker product. In [3], this idea is further accelerated by exploiting the sparsity of the training labels. Let R(d, t ) ∈

Rn×D×T denote the Kronecker product index matrix given by 

R(d, t )i, (d,t ) =

(

1 if ( d, t ) = ( di, t i)0 otherwise, (4) where, as before, d ∈ D n and t ∈ T n are sequences of drugs and targets. The drug and target kernels are denoted by D ∈ R ¯m×m and T ∈ R¯q×q , where m and q represent the numbers of distinct drugs and targets in the training set, and ¯ m and ¯ q are the corresponding numbers in another sample of data ( ¯d, ¯t), which may or may not overlap with the training set — for example, a validation or test set. Now predictions for another sample ( ¯d, ¯t) of size ¯ n can be computed as 

p ← R( ¯d, ¯t)( T ⊗ D)R(d, t )⊤a. 

Using the GVT, this product can be computed in O(min(¯ qn + m¯n, ¯mn + q¯n)) time [3, 35]. Predictions for the training data correspond to the special case ( ¯d, ¯t) = ( d, t ). In this case, they are given as 

p ← R(d, t )( T ⊗ D)R(d, t )⊤a. 

We recall the GVT algorithm for training in Algorithm 1. The algorithm performs training in O(nm +

nq ) time. In what follows, we use the square bracket notation [ a] to denote the index set {1, . . . , a }

(a ∈ N), while r = ( r1, . . . , r n)⊤ ∈ [q]n and s = ( s1, . . . , s n)⊤ ∈ [m]n denote the sequence of the row indices of T and D associated to Kronecker product index matrix R(d, t ). Example 2 in Section 3 provides further clarification of the index sets. 

Algorithm 1: GVT for Training [3]                                                                      

> Input: T∈Rq×q,D∈Rm×m,a∈Rn,r∈[q]n, and s∈[m]n.
> Output: p=R(T⊗D)R⊤a∈Rn.
> 1. M←0∈Rm×q
> 2. For h= 1 , . . . , n do 3. i, j ←rh, s h
> 4. For k= 1 , . . . , q do 5. Mj,k ←Mj,k +ahTk,i ▷O(nq ) time operation
> 6. p←0∈Rn
> 7. For h= 1 , . . . , n do 8. i, j ←rh, s h
> 9. For k= 1 , . . . , m do 10. ph←ph+Dj,k Mk,i ▷O(nm ) time operation
> 11. Return p

43 Stochastic Generalized Vec Trick 

GVT can accelerate any optimization method whose computational cost is dominated by multiplica-tions of a pairwise kernel matrix with a vector. However, the training time of the GVT still directly depends on the number of training samples n. In this section, we introduce a stochastic version, sGVT (Algorithm 3), which can carry out kernel matrix multiplication in O(nBm + nBq) time, where nB is the user specified batch size. To model affinities between drug-target pairs, the batch in sGVT must be selected either target-or drug-wise — that is, the training data are considered block-wise. In what follows, we consider only the target-wise batch selection. Specifically, we randomly choose qB ≤ q target indices and include the drug indices that interact with these targets. This yields a batch B containing nB indices. An illustration of the target-wise batch selection procedure is provided in Example 1. 

Example 1. (Target-wise batch selection) . Assume the training data contains m = 4 drugs 

{d1, . . . , d 4} and q = 6 targets {t1, . . . , t 6} with n = 7 observed drug-target affinities {y1, . . . , y 7} (see Figure 2). Suppose we randomly select a batch of qB = 2 targets, say {t2, t 3}. The batch B is then defined as the set of indices i such that the corresponding affinity yi involves a target in {t2, t 3}.For instance, in Figure 2 the known affinities include 

{(d1, t 1), (d1, t 6), (d2, t 3), (d3, t 2), (d3, t 5), (d4, t 3), (d4, t 4)}

with indices 1 , . . . , 7, respectively. Thus, the resulting batch is B = {3, 4, 6}, which corresponds to pairs 

{(d2, t 3), (d3, t 2), (d4, t 3)},

and the batch size is nB = 3, determined by the number of selected drug-target pairs matching the chosen targets. 

Figure 2: Training data for Examples 1 and 2. 

Remark 1. While one could also construct batches in a drug-wise manner, our preliminary exper-iments suggest that the target-wise strategy consistently performs better, producing more accurate predictions in pairwise learning tasks — particularly in DTA prediction. We note, however, that this effect may be problem specific. In addition to batch selection, another key component of sGVT is the maintenance of the auxiliary dual-drug matrix M ∈ Rm×q . As noted earlier, predictions for the training data can be expressed compactly as p = Ka . In sGVT , however, we compute and update pi only for indices i in the current batch B, while for all other indices pj we reuse their values from previous iterations. Nevertheless, each pi (i ∈ B ) may depend on all dual variables aj (j = 1 , . . . , n ). The aim of matrix M is to model dependencies between predictions in the current batch and dual variables outside the current batch. Preliminary experiments indicate that this information-preserving mechanism is essential for the performance of sGVT : without the matrix M , the stochastic approximation loses important interaction information, leading to a substantial deterioration in predictive accuracy. The last ingredient needed before introducing the sGVT algorithm is the definition of index ma-trices for the kernel matrices. In line with Algorithm 1, we use the sequences s = ( s1, . . . , s n)⊤ ∈ [m]n

and r = ( r1, . . . , r n)⊤ ∈ [q]n, but, as with the predictions, we restrict attention to indices belonging to the current batch. Example 2 illustrates the selection of these indices. 5Example 2. (Kronecker product index matrix and row indices of D and T ). Assume again that the training data contains of m = 4 drugs {d1, . . . , d 4} and q = 6 targets {t1, . . . , t 6}, with n = 7 observed drug-target affinities {y1, . . . , y 7} (see Figure 2). Then sequences s = ( s1, . . . , s n)⊤ ∈ [m]n

and r = ( r1, . . . , r n)⊤ ∈ [q]n specify the row indices of D and T , respectively, and are given by 

s = (1 , 1, 2, 3, 3, 4, 4) ⊤ and r = (1 , 6, 3, 2, 5, 3, 4) ⊤.

The index matrix R(d, t ) (see, eq. (4)) for the Kronecker product T ⊗ D can then be written as 

R(d, t ) = 



e⊤

> (r1−1) m+s1

...

e⊤

> (rn−1) m+sn

 =  e⊤ 

> 1

e⊤ 

> 21

e⊤ 

> 10

e⊤ 

> 7

e⊤ 

> 19

e⊤ 

> 12

e⊤

> 16

⊤ ,

where ei denotes the ith standard basis vector in Rmq .Further, consider the batch B = {3, 4, 6} defined in Example 1. The corresponding row-index sequences are 

sB = (2 , 3, 4) ⊤ and rB = (3 , 2, 3) ⊤,

which specify the rows of D and T relevant for constructing the Kronecker product index matrix. However, we do not explicitly form a separate index matrix for the batch. Next, we present the sGVT training algorithm, assuming target-wise batch selection. In the case of drug-wise batch selection, the order of computations must be modified accordingly, and the auxiliary dual-drug matrix should be replaced by the auxiliary dual-target matrix. 

Algorithm 2: Stochastic GVT for Training 

Input: T ∈ Rq×q , D ∈ Rm×m, M ∈ Rm×q (M = 0 at the first iteration), a ∈ Rn, p ∈ Rn, r ∈ [q]n,

s ∈ [m]n, and batch indices B ∈ [n]nB .

Output: A new approximation of p = R(T ⊗ D)R⊤a ∈ Rn and an updated matrix M .

1. For all h ∈ B do 2. i ← rh

3. For k = 1 , . . . , m do 4. Mk,i ← 0 ▷ O(nB m) time operation 

5. For all h ∈ B do 6. i, j ← rh, s h

7. For k = 1 , . . . , m do 8. Mk,i ← Mk,i + ahDk,j ▷ O(nB m) time operation 

9. For all h ∈ B do 10. ph ← 0

11. i, j ← rh, s h

12. For k = 1 , . . . , q do 13. ph ← ph + Mj,k Tk,i ▷ O(nB q) time operation 

14. Return p, M .

Remark 2. In Steps 4 and 8 of Algorithm 2, we initialize and update only the elements of matrix M

corresponding to the current batch indices, while leaving the other elements unchanged. This strategy preserves information from previous batches and enables the modeling of dependencies between pre-dictions in the current batch and dual variables outside the current batch. After a few iterations of Algorithm 2, each pi, i = 1 , . . . , n, depends on almost all aj , j = 1 , . . . , n , some with old values from previous iterations. 64 Pairwise Learning Model 

In this work, we consider the ε-insensitive squared loss together with ℓ1 regularization 1. In the kernel representation, this leads to the minimization problem minimize  

> a∈Rn

J(a) = L(Ka, y ) + λ∥a∥1, (5) where K is the pairwise kernel matrix, a ∈ Rn is the vector of coefficients, and λ > 0. The loss function 

L(Ka, y ) is defined in (2) with ε > 0. Instead of solving (5) directly with respect to the full dual variable a ∈ Rn, we repeatedly minimize it over random batch-specific dual variables aB ∈ RnB . In other words, only the components of a

corresponding to the current batch indices are treated as variables, while the remaining components are kept fixed. Consequently, we compute Ka only for indices in the current batch, and for all others we reuse the values pi and ai from previous iterations. The auxiliary dual-drug matrix M ∈ Rm×q

(together with the auxiliary gradient-drug matrix G ∈ Rm×q , see Algorithm 3) stores information from earlier batches and thereby captures dependencies between predictions in the current batch and dual variables outside it. We denote the resulting batch-wise objective by JB(a) and its corresponding subgradient by ξB ∈ ∂J B(a), using the full dual vector a in the notation to emphasize that its current value depends on all components, even though only a subset is optimized at each step. The proposed procedure consists of four main components: 1. SPaiK (Algorithm 3): The main algorithm SPaiK performs the necessary initializations, vali-dates the results, and repeatedly calls StoILMBM to solve problem (5). It returns the predictions 

p ∈ Rn together with performance index values (see Section 5.1 for details). 2. StoILMBM (Algorithm 4): StoILMBM is responsible for selecting (and reselecting) target-wise batches for the method. It then calls InexactLMBM to solve the batch subproblem min JB(a)for the chosen batch indices. 3. InexactLMBM [19]: InexactLMBM is a nonsmooth optimization solver designed for large-scale problems with inexact information 2. It solves the batch subproblem iteratively, and in each iteration the computation of JB(a) requires calling the sGVT algorithm. 4. sGVT (Algorithm 2): sGVT efficiently carries out the computations required for the batch objective via stochastic generalized vec trick updates. 

Remark 3. In the first call of StoILMBM (Algorithm 4), we use one complete epoch over the target indices when selecting the batches. That is, in Step 0 of Algorithm 3, we set imax  

> B

← q/q B, and in Step 3 of Algorithm 4, the batches are selected such that each target index is included at least once during this epoch, with the target indices processed in random order. This is not necessarily required by the method, but it provides a more accurate results in practice as shown in Section 5.3.4. In the subsequent calls of StoILMBM , we use only one randomly selected batch before re-validation, that is, we set imax  

> B

← 1 in Step 3 of Algorithm 3. 

Remark 4. We compute the batch function value JB(a) using the full dual variable a. From a purely optimization perspective, one could instead pass only the batch-specific dual variable aB to 

InexactLMBM (see Step 1 of Algorithm 4). However, we deliberately use the full dual variable for two reasons: First, the complete function value is required for validation and performance monitoring, making it essential to maintain consistency across batches. Second, InexactLMBM relies on function values in its step-size selection and related mechanisms; providing only partial values would introduce unnecessary variability and could impair the stability of the optimization. Using the full a therefore yields more reliable convergence behavior and ensures that the optimization process remains directly comparable across iterations.    

> 1We note, however, that our approach is not tied to the chosen loss function; any other locally Lipschitz continuous loss function could equally well be applied.
> 2InexactLMBM belongs to the LMBM family [10, 11], whose variants have been successfully applied in several machine learning tasks, including clustering and pairwise kernel learning [12, 15, 16, 17, 18, 24]. Moreover, its ability to handle inexact function and subgradient information make it particularly suitable for the present stochastic setting.

7Algorithm 3: SPaiK 

Input: Data x = ( d, t ) ∈ X with labels y ∈ Y ; divided into training, validation, and test sets. 

Arguments: Loss function L (default: epsilon-insensitive squared loss); kernel functions kD and kT

for drugs and targets a; percentage of targets used in one batch pB > 0; the maximum number of iterations it SPaiK max > 0 (default: it SPaiK max = 50); evaluation metrics M = {ν1, . . . , ν k } (default: 

{C-index , IC-index , MSE }); primary validation metric νval ∈ M for model selection/early stopping (default: C-index); and the maximum number imax val > 0 of consecutive validation evaluations without improvement (default: imax val = 3). 

Output: Predictions p ∈ Rn and all performance metrics νi ∈ M w.r.t. test data. 

Step 0. (Initialization ) Set a starting point a1 ← 0 ∈ Rn and compute the regularization parameter 

λ ← L(0 ,y ) 

> n2

and the loss sensitivity parameter ε = 10 −5 · max y∈Y train (y). Compute the following: 

qB ← max( ⌊ pB q

100 ⌋, 1) , imax  

> B

← ⌊ qqB

⌋, and it StoILMBM max ← ⌊ 1000 

imax 

> B

⌋,

where qB is the target-wise batch size, it StoILMBM max is the maximum number of iterations used with StoILMBM, and imax  

> B

is the maximum number of batches after which predictions are (re)validated. Set M 1, G 1 ← 0 ∈ Rm×q , νbest ← 0, abest ← 0 ∈ Rn, ival ← 0, and i ← 1. 

Step 1. (Regularized risk minimization problem ) Apply StoILMBM (Algorithm 4) to minimize the regu-larized risk minimization problem (5) starting from ai with the regularization parameter λ, matrices 

M i and Gi, and limits imax  

> B

and it StoILMBM max . Stop Algorithm 4 after it StoILMBM max iterations or when a stationary point of the batch problem is found; in the latter case, set stop ← true . Denote the obtained solution by ai+1 and the corresponding matrices M i+1 and Gi+1 .

Step 2. (Validation and early stopping ) Compute the validation metric νval w.r.t. the validation data and, if νval > ν best , set νbest ← νval , abest ← ai+1 , and ival ← 0. Otherwise, set ival ← ival + 1. If 

ival > i max val , proceed to Step 4. 

Step 3. (Update parameters ) If i < it SPaiK max , set imax  

> B

← 1, i ← i + 1, and go to Step 1. 

Step 4. (Termination ) STOP with abest as a best solution. Compute and return the predictions and performance indices νi ∈ M w.r.t. test data. 

> a

In this work Gaussian kernels for drugs and targets are used but other kernel functions can be applied as well. The pairwise interactions between drug and target features are modelled via the pairwise Kronecker product kernel matrix K.

Algorithm 4: StoILMBM 

Input: A starting point a1 ∈ Rn, the saved matrices M 1, G 1 ∈ Rm×q , the target-wise batch size qB ≤ q,the maximum number of batches imax  

> B

> 0, and the iteration limit it max > 0. 

Output: A heuristic minimizer ah ∈ Rn of J : Rn → R and the updated matrices M h, G h ∈ Rm×q .

Step 0. Initialization: Select a batch B1 based on qB randomly selected target indices and their corre-sponding drug indices. Set nB ← |B 1|, iB ← 1, and h ← 1. 

Step 1. Solving the batch problem: Starting from the point ah apply InexactLMBM to minimize the batch function JBh :

• Use sGVT (Algorithm 2) with matrices M h and Gh to compute JBh (ahs ) and ξs 

> Bh

∈ ∂J Bh (ahs )(here, s is an iteration index within InexactLMBM ). Save the sGVT matrices M hs and Ghs .

• Stop InexactLMBM after it max iterations or with the stationary point of JBh . Denote the solution by ah+1 , and the corresponding matrices by M h+1 and Gh+1 .Set h ← h + 1. 

Step 2. Stopping criterion: Set iB ← iB +1. If iB > i max  

> B

STOP the algorithm with ah as a best solution, and M h and Gh the associated matrices. 

Step 3. Selection of the new batch: Randomly select qB target indices such that each target index is included at least once within an epoch. Select a new batch Bh based on these target indices and their corresponding drug indices. Set nB ← |B h|, and go to Step 1. 

85 Numerical Experiments 

Now we are ready to compare the proposed SPaiK -algorithm with some state-of-the-art methods in pairwise kernel learning. We start this section by describing the datasets, different experimental settings for data, and the performance measures used. Then we continue with implementational details of the tested algorithms and, finally, we give the results of our experiments. 

## 5.1 Data, Experimental Settings, and Performance Metrics 

The numerical experiments were performed on seven benchmark DTA datasets, summarized in Ta-ble 1. These datasets were selected because (i) pairwise kernel methods were originally introduced for biomedical affinity prediction and are widely benchmarked in this domain, (ii) they span a range of sizes, label types, and sparsity levels, and (iii) they include feature representations for both drugs and targets, which are necessary for Kronecker kernel-based learning. Each dataset is represented by drug and target feature matrices Xd ∈ Rm×m, Xt ∈ Rq×q , together with an interaction affinity matrix Y ∈ Rm×q . In Davis, GPCR, Ion Channels, and Enzymes, all DTAs are known, while Metz, KiBA, and Merget are sparse with only a subset of DTAs observed. The numbers of drugs ( m), targets ( q), known affinities ( n), and percentages of observed affinities (% observed) are reported in Table 1, with further dataset details available in the cited references. In addition, links to all data used in the experiments are available at https://github.com/TurkuML/ IC-index-experiments .Table 1: dataset characteristics. dataset m q n % observed Label type Ref. Davis 68 442 30 056 100 Continuous [7] Metz 1 421 156 93 356 42 Continuous [23] KIBA 2 111 229 118 254 24 Continuous [34] Merget 2 967 226 167 995 25 Continuous [22] G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 223 95 21 185 100 Binary [38] Ion Channels 210 204 42 840 100 Binary [38] Enzymes 445 664 295 480 100 Binary [38] Following [26, 27, 28, 33], pairwise prediction tasks can be categorized into distinct experimental settings , depending on the assumed overlap between the training data and the new pairs to be predicted. We refer to pairs x = ( d, t ) ∈ X not included in the training set as off-training-set (OTS) pairs. Four such OTS settings are distinguished: 

• x ∈ X IDIT if and only if d ∈ Xd and t ∈ Xt (green area in Figure 1); 

• x ∈ X IDOT if and only if d ∈ Xd but t / ∈ Xt (orange bar at the rightmost position of Figure 1); 

• x ∈ X ODIT if and only if d / ∈ Xd but t ∈ Xt (yellow bar at the bottom of Figure 1); 

• x ∈ X ODOT if and only if d / ∈ Xd and t / ∈ Xt (red rectangle in Figure 1). Hereafter, these are referred to as the IDIT , IDOT , ODIT , and ODOT settings (or data). Setting IDIT corresponds to missing value imputation, where both the drug and the target are present in the training set. Settings IDOT and ODIT represent multilabel learning tasks, aiming to predict labels for novel targets and novel drugs, respectively. Setting ODOT, known as zero-shot learning, is the most challenging case in which predictions are required for pairs where neither the drug nor the target appears in the training data. Each dataset is randomly partitioned five times into separate training, validation, and test sets (in proportions of 1/3, 1/3, and 1/3), respecting the requirements of each experimental setting. We report results as averages over these splits, and the same partitions are used across all learning methods to ensure comparability. The results of our numerical experiments are evaluated using the Concordance Index (C-index) [8], the Interaction Concordance Index (IC-index) [27], the Mean Squared Error (MSE, only in Appendix), and the measured CPU time. The C-index (higher is better) is a convenient performance metric when the relative ordering of labels is more important than their exact values, whereas MSE (lower is 9better) directly measures the accuracy of predicted values. For reference, a constant predictor achieves a trivial performance level of 0.5 with respect to the C-index, while a value of 1 corresponds to perfect prediction [27]. The IC-index (higher is better) is a more recent performance metric designed to assess whether a pairwise learning algorithm captures nonlinear interactions between object pairs or not. In other words, it indicates whether the model goes beyond learning simple main effects and provides genuine modeling of pairwise relationships. Formally, the IC-index corresponds to computing the C-index between yi − yj and f (xi) − f (xj ) over all row pairs. Linear predictors (e.g., drug-constant or target-constant functions) achieve a trivial IC-index value of 0.5, whereas a value of 1 reflects perfect modeling of nonlinear pairwise interactions [27]. 

## 5.2 Methods 

The following pairwise kernel learning algorithms are used in our experiments: 

CGKronRLS: We apply the state-of-the-art method CGKronRLS [3] as a benchmark. This method has demonstrated strong real-world performance, ranking among the top-performing methods in the IDG-DREAM Drug-Kinase Binding Prediction Challenge [5]. 

CGKronRLS uses the conjugate gradient (CG) method to solve the standard RLS formulation of the pairwise kernel learning problem (1): it applies the squared loss ∥y − p∥2 as a loss function and the Euclidean norm λ 

> 2

∥f ∥2 

> H

for regularization. The regularization parameter λ is selected from the grid {2−10 , 2−5, 2−4, 2−3, 2−2, 2−1, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 210 }, and the tuning of λ is performed separately for each dataset and each setting. In CGKronRLS , the C-index of the validation data is used to select the best solution with an early stopping procedure [39]. 

CGKronRLS is implemented in Python/Cython and it belongs to RLScore [25] — the regular-ized least-squares machine learning algorithms package — available at https://github.com/aatapa/ RLScore .

KronSVM: Further, we use KronSVM [3] — a hinge loss variant of CGKronRLS — as a bencmark for binary labelled datasets. We note that hinge loss is generally considered more effective for classification than squared error loss and, indeed, in its original introduction [3], KronSVM demonstrated slightly bet-ter predictive accuracy than CGKronRLS for binary-labeled data. KronSVM uses the truncated Newton method to solve the SVM formulation of the classification problem. The parameters for KronSVM are selected similarly to CGKronRLS . In addition, KronSVM is implemented in Python/Cython, belongs to RLScore 3, and is available at https://github.com/aatapa/RLScore .

SPaiK: SPaiK is an implementation of Algorithm 3. The percentage of targets used to form a batch is denoted by pB ∈ 100 , 20 , 10 , 5, 1 and indicated in the method name SPaiK pB. In particular, SPaiK 100 corresponds to using the non-stochastic GVT, that is, the full batch. Unless otherwise stated, SPaiK pB uses the epoch-wise batch selection described in Algorithm 3 and Remark 3: target indices are processed in random order so that each target index is included at least once within an epoch. To assess the effect of this batch-selection rule, we additionally consider a fully random target-wise variant with pB = 10, denoted by SPaiK-R 10. In this variant, each batch is formed by randomly selecting qB target indices independently of previous batches. The best result in each run is selected based on the C-index computed on the validation data. For the epoch-wise variants SPaiK pB, validation is first performed after one full epoch and then after each subsequently selected batch. For the fully random variant SPaiK-R 10, where no epoch structure is imposed, validation is performed after each randomly selected batch. To account for randomness, the training process is repeated five times with different random seeds for SPaiK pB with pB ∈ 20 , 10 , 5, 1. Since the data is also randomly split five times, this results in a total of 25 independent runs for each percentage of targets, and the final results are obtained by averaging over these runs. The same protocol is used for SPaiK-R 10. For pB = 100, there are no random batches and training is deterministic given a split; we therefore run once per split, resulting in 5 runs in total, and report the average. 

SPaiK is implemented using a combination of Python and Fortran 95 via the F2PY interface. The source code of SPaiK is available at https://github.com/napsu/SPaiK .   

> 3We note that a newer implementation of KronSVM is available in RLScore . The experiments reported in this paper were carried out using the earlier version available at the time of our numerical tests.

10 All the learning algorithms use Kronecker product kernel matrices to compute the predictions 

p = Ka . With CGKronRLS and KronSVM the Kronecker product matrices are computed implicitly using the GVT [26, 35] from RLScore. The proposed SPaiK -algorithm employs sGVT (Algorithm 2), introduced in this paper, for training, while the original GVT is used for validation and final predictions on the test set 4. The drug and target kernels are computed via Gaussian RBF kernels with the kernel width parameter μ = 10 5 as recommended in [3]. Computational experiments are carried out on iMac, 4.0 GHz Intel(R) Core(TM) i7 machine with 16 GB of RAM. We use Python 3.7 and gfortran to compile the Fortran codes. 

## 5.3 Results 

The results are given in Tables 2–8 in the appendix and summarized here in Figures 3 – 5. In Figure 3 we give the C-indices (blue bar), IC-index (green bar), and time in seconds (red line) for different algorithms and different batch sizes in continuously labeled datasets (see also Tables 2–5). In Figure 4, we summarize the corresponding results (see Tables 6–8) for binary labeled data, and in Figure 5, we compare the epoch-wise and fully random batch selection rules used in SPaiK .IDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.00 2.00 4.00 6.00 8.00 10.00 12.00 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1

C-index IC-index Time 

(a) Davis IDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.00 25.00 50.00 75.00 100.00 125.00 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1

C-index IC-index Time (b) Metz IDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.00 100.00 200.00 300.00 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1

C-index IC-index Time 

(c) KiBA IDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.00 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1

C-index IC-index Time (d) Merget 

Figure 3: C-index (blue bar), IC-index (green bar), and time (red line) of pairwise kernel learning algorithms in data with continuous labels under different experimental settings. 

4For the test data, we use the original GVT to ensure results that are directly comparable with those obtained by other methods. For validation, the choice was made primarily for ease of implementation. In principle, sGVT could be extended without difficulty to both validation and test phases. 

11 IDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 20.00 25.00 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1

C-index IC-index Time (a) GPCR IDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.00 25.00 50.00 75.00 100.00 125.00 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 KronSVM CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1

C-index IC-index Time (b) Ion Channels IDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT 

> 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 0.00 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1 CGKronRLS SPaiK 100 SpaiK 20 SPaiK 10 SPaiK 5 SPaiK 1

C-index IC-index Time 

(c) Enzymes 

Figure 4: C-index (blue bar), IC-index (green bar), and time (red line) of pairwise kernel learning algorithms in data with binary labels under different experimental settings. In the Enzymes dataset, KronSVM was excluded from experiments because it failed to complete the training even on the first IDIT data within five hours. 

5.3.1 General Observations 

As expected, the best prediction accuracy was achieved on the most informative IDIT data, whereas the more realistic IDOT, ODIT, and ODOT settings resulted in lower accuracies (see Figures 3 and 4). In many cases, results on the IDOT data outperformed those on the ODIT data, indicating that predicting new targets for known drugs tends to be easier than predicting new drugs for known targets. The most difficult scenario for all methods was zero-shot learning (ODOT). Nevertheless, even in this challenging setting, a predictive model could be successfully trained on most datasets. In addition, we note that prediction is generally easier in binary-labeled datasets (GPCR, Ion Channels, and Enzymes) than in continuously labeled datasets (Davis, Metz, KiBA, and Merget), especially so on IDIT data. Finally, we remark that the longer computational times observed on IDIT data are explained by its larger size, which leads to a correspondingly larger problem to be solved. These observations are consistent with earlier findings in [17, 24, 26, 27]. 

5.3.2 Comparison of SPaiK100 with CGKronRLS and KronSVM KronSVM was evaluated only on the binary-labeled datasets, where it proved to be by far the most time-consuming method — on average about 6 and 10 times slower than CGKronRLS on GPCR and Ion Channels, respectively — and did not finish within 5 hours on the Enzymes dataset (whereas CGKronRLS 

12 required only about 370 seconds (see Figure 4). Although KronSVM occasionally produced more accurate results than CGKronRLS , this was neither consistent nor the typical outcome. For this reason, we consider CGKronRLS the more relevant baseline for evaluating SPaiK100 . We recall that SPaiK100 

corresponds to using the (non-stochastic) GVT. The differences between CGKronRLS and SPaiK100 lie in the choice of loss function (least squares vs. ε-insensitive squared loss), regularization (Euclidean norm vs. ℓ1-norm), and optimization method (CG vs. InexactLMBM). Moreover, CGKronRLS is a well-established and mature implementation, whereas SPaiK represents a novel combination of algorithms. These distinctions help to explain the performance differences observed between the two methods, while also highlighting that SPaiK achieves competitive results despite its novelty. A quick look at Figures 3 and 4 reveals that CGKronRLS is the most accurate predictor on the simplest IDIT data and often also on IDOT and ODIT data. Nevertheless, on the latter two the gap narrows and SPaiK100 matches or nearly matches CGKronRLS across datasets. Interestingly, on Davis, Ion Channels, and Enzymes under the ODIT setting, SPaiK100 even surpasses CGKronRLS .In zero-shot learning (ODOT), SPaiK100 produced more accurate predictions than CGKronRLS in all but two dataset: Ion Channels and Enzymes. This improvement is likely related to the differences in optimization and modeling choices: SPaiK100 employs the nonsmooth optimization solver Inex-actLMBM , which is less sensitive to perturbations than the smooth CG solver, together with an 

ε-insensitive squared loss and ℓ1-regularization. These choices may provide additional robustness in the zero-shot setting, where both drugs and targets are unseen during training and the learning task is inherently more difficult. A similar behavior was observed in [17] with sparse pairwise kernel learning models. The CPU times of SPaiK100 — the full-batch version of SPaiK — are mostly comparable to, or shorter than, those of CGKronRLS . Longer CPU times for SPaiK100 are observed only for the KiBA, Ion Channels, and Enzymes datasets under the IDIT setting. Since in SPaiK the batch size nB (or, equivalently, the batch percentage pB) directly controls the computational cost, we next examine how varying this parameter affects both runtime and predictive accuracy. 

5.3.3 Different Batch Sizes 

Across both continuously labeled and binary labeled datasets, the experiments show a clear accuracy– efficiency trade-off in SPaiK . As the batch percentage pB decreases, the computational cost is substan-tially reduced, while predictive accuracy, measured by the C-index and IC-index, gradually decreases. Overall, the most favorable trade-off is obtained with moderate batch percentages, especially around 

pB = 20. In contrast, very small batches ( pB = 1–5) give the shortest CPU times, but they also lead to more noticeable accuracy losses and are therefore mainly suitable for cases where runtime is the dominant constraint. For the continuous datasets, reducing the batch percentage from pB = 100 to pB = 20 has only a minor effect on predictive accuracy. The average decrease in the C-index value from SPaiK100 

to SPaiK20 is 0 .003, indicating that SPaiK20 maintains almost the same predictive performance as the full-batch version. Further reductions in the batch percentage lead to larger accuracy losses: for 

SPaiK10 , SPaiK5 , and SPaiK1 , the average decreases are 0 .011, 0 .030, and 0 .059. A similar trend is observed for the binary datasets, where the corresponding decreases in the C-index values are 0 .008, 0.018, 0 .033, and 0 .061 for SPaiK20 , SPaiK10 , SPaiK5 , and SPaiK1 , respectively. Thus, moderate batch percentages preserve predictive accuracy well, whereas the smallest batch percentages lead to a more visible degradation. At the same time, the reduction in CPU time is substantial. In particular, SPaiK20 is consider-ably faster than SPaiK100 , sometimes by an order of magnitude, while maintaining nearly the same accuracy. This makes SPaiK20 a robust default choice and a particularly attractive compromise be-tween predictive performance and computational cost. In the more realistic IDOT, ODIT, and ODOT settings, SPaiK20 often provides the best overall trade-off. This is particularly evident in the zero-shot setting (ODOT), where SPaiK20 is competitive with, and in some cases better than, the baseline methods, indicating that stochastic batching does not weaken generalization in the most challenging setting. The IC-index further supports the effectiveness of sGVT . Even with relatively small batch per-centages ( pB ≥ 10), sGVT is able to capture pairwise interactions between drugs and targets. This is partly due to the auxiliary dual–drug matrix M , which preserves information from previous iterations of the sGVT algorithm and thereby maintains dependencies across batches. A notable exception is the 13 Merget dataset, where the IC-index values are lower across all variants of SPaiK , including SPaiK100 

(see Figure 3(d)). This suggests that the weaker performance on Merget is more likely related to the properties of the dataset itself than to stochastic batching. Overall, the results indicate that SPaiK20 offers substantial computational gains with little loss in accuracy. Although CGKronRLS often gives highly accurate results, especially in the more informative IDIT setting, SPaiK20 provides a more scalable alternative with a strong accuracy–efficiency balance. Smaller batch percentages ( pB ≤ 5) can be useful when computational efficiency is the main priority, but they should be used cautiously due to the increased loss in predictive accuracy. Finally, we note that sGVT is not tied to SPaiK or the StoILMBM optimizer: as a stochastic matrix–vector multiplication technique for Kronecker-product kernels, it could in principle also be incorporated into other Kronecker-product kernel methods, including CG-based RLS approaches such as CGKronRLS .

5.3.4 Comparison of Epoch-Wise and Random Batch Selection 

Finally, to assess the effect of the epoch-wise batch selection, we compare SPaiK 10 with a fully random target-wise variant, denoted by SPaiK-R 10. The two variants use the same batch size, but differ in how the target indices are selected: SPaiK 10 processes the target indices epoch-wise in random order, whereas SPaiK-R 10 selects the target indices independently at random for each batch. We compare the two variants in terms of C-index, IC-index, and CPU time over all seven datasets in Figure 5. -0.030 -0.020 -0.010 0.000 0.010 0.020 0.030 Davis Metz KiBA Merget GPCR IC EIDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT         

> (a) C-index -0.010 0.000 0.010 0.020 0.030 0.040 Davis Metz KiBA Merget GPCR IC EIDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT (b) IC-index -10.00 -5.00 0.00 5.00 10.00 15.00 Davis Metz KiBA Merget GPCR IC EIDIT IDOT ODIT ODOT (c) CPU-time

Figure 5: Comparison of epoch-wise and fully random target-wise batch selection for SPaiK 10. The figures show the differences in (a) C-index, (b) IC-index, and (c) CPU-time between SPaiK 10 and 

SPaiK-R 10, where positive values indicate better performance of the epoch-wise variant SPaiK 10. In general, the C-index is usually higher for the epoch-wise variant than for the fully random variant, although on the ODOT datasets the fully random variant occasionally obtains better values. An interesting observation, however, is that the IC-index, which measures pairwise interaction-level performance, is almost always better for the epoch-wise variant. The only exception is the Merget dataset in the ODOT setting, where the values are very close; however, for Merget the IC-index values are close to 0.5 (the trivial case) also in general, see Figure 3(d). This suggests that the epoch-wise batch selection is particularly beneficial for preserving pairwise interaction information, even in cases where the C-index alone would indicate better performance for the fully random variant. This is also natural, since the epoch-wise approach approximates the full Kronecker-product kernel matrix more systematically, whereas with fully random target-wise batch selection some parts of the interaction structure may remain insufficiently represented. The CPU times of the two variants are generally comparable. The largest differences are ob-served for some IDIT datasets, where the difference reaches up to approximately 15% of the total computational time. Since the differences occur in both directions, neither variant shows a systematic computational advantage. 

# 6 Conclusions 

In this work, we introduced the stochastic generalized vec trick (sGVT), a stochastic extension of the generalized vec trick (GVT) for efficient multiplication of Kronecker-product kernel matrices with 14 vectors. From the naive case to our stochastic method, the computational cost of this multiplication improves as follows: 

• Naive computation: O(n2), where n is the number of drug-target pairs. 

• GVT: O(nm + nq ), where m, q ≪ n are numbers of unique drugs and targets, respectively; 

• sGVT: O(nBm + nBq), where nB ≪ n is the batch size defined by the user. Building on sGVT , we further developed SPaiK , a scalable pairwise kernel learning algorithm that combines this efficient kernel computation with a new stochastic optimizer, the stochastic inexact limited-memory bundle method (StoILMBM). We emphasize, however, that sGVT is not restricted to SPaiK : as a stochastic kernel matrix–vector multiplication technique, it can also be combined with other optimization and learning methods that rely on Kronecker-product kernel computations. We evaluated SPaiK on seven real-world drug–target affinity datasets and compared it against established kernel baselines, CGKronRLS and KronSVM . The results show that SPaiK is highly compet-itive with these state-of-the-art methods. Although CGKronRLS gives the highest accuracy in the most informative IDIT setting, SPaiK performs strongly in the more challenging experimental settings. In particular, in the zero-shot learning (ODOT), where both drugs and targets are unseen during training, 

SPaiK remains competitive with the baselines and outperforms them in several cases. Among the SPaiK variants, the full-batch version, SPaiK100 , provides a useful reference point, while SPaiK20 achieves nearly the same accuracy with substantially lower computational cost. This indicates that stochastic batching can preserve predictive performance while making kernel-based pair-wise learning considerably more scalable. Moreover, the consistently high interaction concordance index (IC-index) values show that the stochastic version of GVT can successfully capture pairwise interactions between drugs and targets 5.Overall, the experiments demonstrate that SPaiK is a practical and scalable alternative for both continuous and binary pairwise learning tasks. A batch percentage of around pB = 20 provides the best balance between runtime and predictive accuracy, extending the applicability of pairwise kernel methods to problem sizes that are difficult to handle with existing full-batch approaches. 

# Acknowledgements 

The work was financially supported by the Research Council of Finland, Projects No. #340182 and #345804 led by Tapio Pahikkala and Projects No. #340140 and #345805 led by Antti Airola. The authors acknowledge the use of ChatGPT by OpenAI for language editing. The authors take full responsibility for the content of the manuscript. 

# References 

[1] Abedsoltan, A., Belkin, M., and Pandit, P. Toward large kernel models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (2023), ICML’23, JMLR.org. [2] Abedsoltan, A., Ma, S., Pandit, P., and Belkin, M. Fast training of large kernel models with delayed projections, 2024. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16658 Available at https://arxiv. org/abs/2411.16658 .[3] Airola, A., and Pahikkala, T. Fast kronecker product kernel methods via generalized vec trick. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 29 (2018), 3374–3387. [4] Bagirov, A., Karmitsa, N., and M¨ akel¨ a, M.M. Introduction to Nonsmooth Optimization: Theory, Practice and Software . Springer, 2014. [5] Cichonska, A., Ravikumar, B., Allaway, R., and et. al. Crowdsourced mapping of unexplored target space of kinase inhibitors. Nature Communications 12 , 3307 (2021), 146–157.   

> 5The only exception was the Merget dataset, where performance was lower across all methods, including SPaiK with full batch, suggesting that the limitation stems from the dataset rather than from stochastic batching.

15 [6] Dai, B., Xie, B., He, N., Liang, Y., Raj, A., Balcan, M.-F., and Song, L. Scalable kernel methods via doubly stochastic gradients, 2015. arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.5599. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5599 .[7] Davis, M. I., Hunt, J. P., Herrgard, S., Ciceri, P., Wodicka, L. M., Pallares, G., Hocker, M., Treiber, D. K., and Zarrinkar, P. P. Comprehensive analysis of kinase inhibitor selectivity. Nature biotechnology 29 , 11 (2011), 1046–1051. [8] G¨ onen, M., and Heller, G. Concordance probability and discriminatory power in proportional hazards regression. Biometrika 92 (2005), 965–970. [9] Gu, B., Geng, X., Li, X., Shi, W., Zheng, G., Deng, C., and Huang, H. Scalable kernel ordinal regression via doubly stochastic gradients. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 32 , 8 (2021), 3677–3689. [10] Haarala, M., Miettinen, K., and M¨ akel¨ a, M.M. New limited memory bundle method for large-scale nonsmooth optimization. Optimization Methods and Software 19 , 6 (2004), 673–692. [11] Haarala, N., Miettinen, K., and M¨ akel¨ a, M.M. Globally convergent limited memory bundle method for large-scale nonsmooth optimization. Mathematical Programming 109 , 1 (2007), 181–205. [12] Halkola, A., Joki, K., Mirtti, T., M¨ akel¨ a, M.M., Aittokallio, T., and Laajala, T.D. OSCAR: Optimal subset cardinality regression using the L0-pseudonorm with applications to prognostic modelling of prostate cancer. PLOS Computational Biology 19 , 3 (2023), e1010333. [13] Hertz, A., Kuflik, T., and Tuval, N. Resolving sets and integer programs for recommender systems. Journal of Global Optimization 81 (2021), 153–178. [14] Hofmann, T., Sch¨ olkopf, B., and Smola, A. Kernel methods in machine learning. The Annals of Statistics 36 , 3 (2008), 1171–1220. [15] Karmitsa, N., Bagirov, A., and Taheri, S. Clustering in large data sets with the limited memory bundle method. Pattern Recognition 83 (2018), 245–259. [16] Karmitsa, N., Eronen, V., M¨ akel¨ a, M.M., Pahikkala, T., and Airola, A. Stochastic limited memory bundle algorithm for clustering in big data. Pattern Recognition 165 (2025), 111654. [17] Karmitsa, N., Joki, K., Airola, A., and Pahikkala, P. Limited memory bundle DC algorithm for sparse pairwise kernel learning. Journal of Global Optimization 92 (2025), 55–85. [18] Karmitsa, N., Taheri, S., Bagirov, A., and M¨ akinen, P. Missing value imputation via clusterwise linear regression. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 34 , 4 (2022), 1889–1901. [19] Lampainen, J., Joki, K., Karmitsa, N., and M¨ akel¨ a, M.M. Inexact limited memory bundle method, 2026. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.08067 .[20] Liu, T. Y. Learning to rank for information retrieval . Springer, Berlin, 2011. [21] Meanti, G., Carratino, L., Rudi, A., and Rosasco, L. Kernel methods through the roof: handling billions of points efficiently. 34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), 2020. [22] Merget, B., Turk, S., Eid, S., Rippmann, F., and Fulle, S. Profiling prediction of kinase inhibitors: toward the virtual assay. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 60 , 1 (2017), 474–485. [23] Metz, J.T., Johnson, E.F., Soni, N.B., Merta, P.J., Kifle, L., and Hajduk, P.J. 

Navigating the kinome. Nature Chemical Biology 7 (2011), 200–202. [24] Paasivirta, P., Numminen, R., Airola, A., Karmitsa, N., and Pahikkala, T. Predict-ing pairwise interaction affinities with ℓ0-penalized least squares — a nonsmooth bi-objective optimization based approach. Optimization Methods and Software in press (2026). 16 [25] Pahikkala, T., and Airola, A. Rlscore: Regularized least-squares learners. Journal of Ma-chine Learning Research 17 (2016), 1–5. [26] Pahikkala, T., Airola, A., Pietil¨ a, S., Shakyawar, S., Szwajda, A., Tang, J., and Aittokallio, T. Toward more realistic drug-target interaction predictions. Briefings in Bioin-formatics 16 , 2 (2014), 325–337. [27] Pahikkala, T., Numminen, R., Movahedi, P., Karmitsa, N., and Airola, A. Interac-tion concordance index: Performance evaluation for interaction prediction methods, 2025. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14419. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.14419 .[28] Park, Y., and Marcotte, E. Flaws in evaluation schemes for pair-input computational pre-dictions. Nature Methods 9 , 12 (2012), 1134–1136. [29] Poggio, T., and Smale, S. The mathematics of learning: Dealing with data. Notices of the American Mathematical Society 50 , 5 (2003), 537–544. [30] Roth, W. E. On direct product matrices. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 40 , 6 (1934), 461–468. [31] Rudi, A., Carratino, L., and Rosasco, L. FALKON: An optimal large scale kernel method. 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), 2017. [32] Sch¨ olkopf, B., Herbrich, R., and Smola, A. J. A generalized representer theorem. Pro-ceedings of the 14th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory and 5th European Conference on Computational Learning Theory (2001), 416–426. [33] Schrynemackers, M., K¨ uffner, R., and Geurts, P. On protocols and measures for the validation of supervised methods for the inference of biological networks. Frontiers in Genetics 4, 262 (2013). [34] Tang, J., Szwajda, A., Shakyawar, S., Xu, T., Hintsanen, P., Wennerberg, K., and Aittokallio, T. Making sense of large-scale kinase inhibitor bioactivity data sets: a comparative and integrative analysis. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 54 , 3 (2014), 735–743. [35] Viljanen, M., Airola, A., and Pahikkala, T. Generalized vec trick for fast learning of pairwise kernel models. Machine Learning 111 (2022), 543–573. [36] Wang, Z., Zhou, Y., Hong, L., Zou, Y., Su, H., and Chen, S. Pairwise learning for neural link prediction, 2022. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.02936. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2112.02936 .[37] Xu, D., Ruan, C., Korpeoglu, E., Kumar, S., and Achan, K. Rethinking neural vs. matrix-factorization collaborative filtering: the theoretical perspectives. In International Conference on Machine Learning (2021), PMLR, pp. 11514–11524. [38] Yamanishi, Y., Araki, M., Gutteridge, A., Honda, W., and Kanehisa, M. Predic-tion of drug–target interaction networks from the integration of chemical and genomic spaces. 

Bioinformatics 24 , 13 (2008), i232–i240. [39] Yao, Y., Rosasco, L., and Caponnetto, A. On early stopping in gradient descent learning. 

Constructive Approximation 26 , 2 (2007), 289–315. 17 Appendix 

The results of our numerical experiments are given in Tables 2–8. We recall that the results are averaged over five different training, validation, and test set splits of each data. In addition, within the different data splits, the stochastic method SPaiK is executed with (and averaged over) five different random batch selections. Table 2: Results in Davis. Setting Method C-index IC-index MSE CPU IDIT CGKronRLS 0.845 0.692 0.395 10.67 SPaiK 100 0.822 0.639 0.474 8.40 SpaiK 20 0.813 0.628 0.498 4.39 SpaiK-R 10 0.797 0.626 0.535 2.66 SPaiK 10 0.808 0.631 0.509 2.91 SPaiK 5 0.798 0.621 0.544 2.32 SPaiK 1 0.763 0.601 0.680 1.64 IDOT CGKronRLS 0.797 0.649 0.577 2.05 SPaiK 100 0.794 0.638 0.558 1.42 SpaiK 20 0.790 0.633 0.575 0.89 SpaiK-R 10 0.780 0.625 0.624 0.72 SPaiK 10 0.782 0.630 0.613 0.76 SPaiK 5 0.777 0.625 0.653 0.74 SPaiK 1 0.737 0.613 0.839 0.57 ODIT CGKronRLS 0.678 0.572 0.827 2.15 SPaiK 100 0.679 0.564 0.826 1.26 SpaiK 20 0.675 0.560 0.856 0.79 SpaiK-R 10 0.660 0.555 0.898 0.71 SPaiK 10 0.666 0.559 0.866 0.76 SPaiK 5 0.658 0.556 0.917 0.69 SPaiK 1 0.619 0.547 1.119 0.53 ODOT CGKronRLS 0.614 0.550 1.005 2.16 SPaiK 100 0.634 0.550 0.956 1.27 SpaiK 20 0.638 0.548 0.981 0.82 SpaiK-R 10 0.628 0.546 1.009 0.71 SPaiK 10 0.634 0.547 1.017 0.73 SPaiK 5 0.627 0.543 1.042 0.69 SPaiK 1 0.606 0.539 1.203 0.56 18 Table 3: Results in Metz. Setting Method C-index IC-index MSE CPU IDIT CGKronRLS 0.799 0.680 0.221 101.22 SPaiK 100 0.763 0.614 0.280 80.42 SpaiK 20 0.761 0.617 0.282 41.46 SpaiK-R 10 0.727 0.610 0.335 24.53 SPaiK 10 0.740 0.615 0.316 24.23 SPaiK 5 0.710 0.613 0.367 17.87 SPaiK 1 0.656 0.595 0.632 8.61 IDOT CGKronRLS 0.681 0.595 0.381 16.81 SPaiK 100 0.674 0.575 0.395 10.02 SpaiK 20 0.675 0.573 0.419 5.47 SpaiK-R 10 0.669 0.569 0.428 4.76 SPaiK 10 0.669 0.574 0.424 4.86 SPaiK 5 0.644 0.571 0.541 3.97 SPaiK 1 0.644 0.571 0.541 4.02 ODIT CGKronRLS 0.700 0.644 0.436 16.98 SPaiK 100 0.687 0.603 0.453 9.53 SpaiK 20 0.680 0.605 0.476 6.78 SpaiK-R 10 0.653 0.592 0.554 4.92 SPaiK 10 0.662 0.602 0.521 5.19 SPaiK 5 0.614 0.583 0.728 3.99 SPaiK 1 0.614 0.583 0.728 4.03 ODOT CGKronRLS 0.601 0.549 0.610 13.77 SPaiK 100 0.603 0.553 0.576 11.97 SpaiK 20 0.608 0.551 0.623 5.41 SpaiK-R 10 0.607 0.549 0.626 4.67 SPaiK 10 0.607 0.550 0.649 4.91 SPaiK 5 0.594 0.549 0.694 4.07 SPaiK 1 0.594 0.549 0.694 4.15 19 Table 4: Results in KiBA. Setting Method C-index IC-index MSE CPU IDIT CGKronRLS 0.805 0.690 0.273 218.59 SPaiK 100 0.775 0.644 0.344 261.10 SpaiK 20 0.774 0.645 0.346 103.33 SpaiK-R 10 0.757 0.642 0.373 62.55 SPaiK 10 0.767 0.648 0.354 65.94 SPaiK 5 0.745 0.641 0.404 43.33 SPaiK 1 0.644 0.600 0.989 20.56 IDOT CGKronRLS 0.705 0.634 0.468 32.62 SPaiK 100 0.692 0.608 0.506 36.07 SpaiK 20 0.692 0.607 0.520 13.25 SpaiK-R 10 0.679 0.595 0.598 9.62 SPaiK 10 0.682 0.598 0.596 9.14 SPaiK 5 0.663 0.586 0.717 8.20 SPaiK 1 0.646 0.580 1.295 2.90 ODIT CGKronRLS 0.680 0.660 1.612 26.71 SPaiK 100 0.672 0.635 1.633 37.33 SpaiK 20 0.661 0.632 1.675 15.63 SpaiK-R 10 0.633 0.618 1.774 12.74 SPaiK 10 0.646 0.627 1.751 12.57 SPaiK 5 0.623 0.613 1.955 11.34 SPaiK 1 0.601 0.599 2.231 3.86 ODOT CGKronRLS 0.602 0.581 1.897 21.15 SPaiK 100 0.603 0.582 1.824 40.26 SpaiK 20 0.600 0.577 1.835 16.29 SpaiK-R 10 0.597 0.566 1.914 12.32 SPaiK 10 0.600 0.573 1.890 12.49 SPaiK 5 0.590 0.564 2.050 10.99 SPaiK 1 0.582 0.562 2.704 4.00 20 Table 5: Results in Merget. Setting Method C-index IC-index MSE CPU IDIT CGKronRLS 0.816 0.565 0.303 351.13 SPaiK 100 0.797 0.517 0.345 279.81 SpaiK 20 0.793 0.517 0.349 121.11 SpaiK-R 10 0.782 0.516 0.370 64.00 SPaiK 10 0.786 0.517 0.359 75.01 SPaiK 5 0.773 0.517 0.378 52.58 SPaiK 1 0.689 0.512 0.672 29.44 IDOT CGKronRLS 0.800 0.528 0.342 64.88 SPaiK 100 0.791 0.508 0.364 33.48 SpaiK 20 0.787 0.507 0.373 18.46 SpaiK-R 10 0.769 0.504 0.411 11.24 SPaiK 10 0.774 0.509 0.401 12.88 SPaiK 5 0.731 0.506 0.602 10.38 SPaiK 1 0.701 0.503 0.660 4.43 ODIT CGKronRLS 0.662 0.539 0.670 46.62 SPaiK 100 0.662 0.516 0.636 26.51 SpaiK 20 0.662 0.516 0.643 14.19 SpaiK-R 10 0.657 0.511 0.683 9.51 SPaiK 10 0.660 0.513 0.686 10.48 SPaiK 5 0.645 0.513 0.740 9.98 SPaiK 1 0.635 0.509 0.760 3.98 ODOT CGKronRLS 0.663 0.523 0.660 57.61 SPaiK 100 0.663 0.506 0.650 30.80 SpaiK 20 0.660 0.503 0.672 17.01 SpaiK-R 10 0.654 0.506 0.688 11.12 SPaiK 10 0.657 0.505 0.709 13.28 SPaiK 5 0.647 0.504 0.814 11.95 SPaiK 1 0.631 0.501 0.852 5.00 21 Table 6: Results in GPCR. Setting Method C-index IC-index MSE CPU IDIT KronSVM 0.899 0.849 0.024 23.21 CGKronRLS 0.896 0.842 0.024 4.49 SPaiK 100 0.862 0.783 0.027 1.05 SpaiK 20 0.863 0.791 0.030 0.79 SpaiK-R 10 0.832 0.748 0.030 0.60 SPaiK 10 0.842 0.769 0.030 0.62 SPaiK 5 0.782 0.715 0.034 0.42 SPaiK 1 0.748 0.695 0.036 0.40 IDOT KronSVM 0.765 0.715 0.025 10.48 CGKronRLS 0.805 0.741 0.028 1.22 SPaiK 100 0.792 0.726 0.029 0.43 SpaiK 20 0.773 0.731 0.032 0.36 SpaiK-R 10 0.736 0.693 0.036 0.33 SPaiK 10 0.749 0.716 0.036 0.34 SPaiK 5 0.724 0.701 0.042 0.30 SPaiK 1 0.724 0.701 0.042 0.29 ODIT KronSVM 0.792 0.715 0.029 9.44 CGKronRLS 0.811 0.721 0.032 1.47 SPaiK 100 0.805 0.705 0.030 0.38 SpaiK 20 0.788 0.711 0.032 0.36 SpaiK-R 10 0.747 0.661 0.033 0.30 SPaiK 10 0.769 0.696 0.034 0.33 SPaiK 5 0.742 0.677 0.034 0.29 SPaiK 1 0.742 0.677 0.034 0.29 ODOT KronSVM 0.675 0.582 0.031 9.78 CGKronRLS 0.693 0.607 0.034 1.22 SPaiK 100 0.724 0.640 0.033 0.42 SpaiK 20 0.699 0.648 0.036 0.36 SpaiK-R 10 0.673 0.613 0.036 0.33 SPaiK 10 0.650 0.623 0.039 0.35 SPaiK 5 0.636 0.610 0.041 0.30 SPaiK 1 0.636 0.610 0.041 0.30 22 Table 7: Results in Ion Channels. Setting Method C-index IC-index MSE CPU IDIT KronSVM 0.945 0.913 0.019 109.88 CGKronRLS 0.946 0.912 0.019 14.18 SPaiK 100 0.934 0.886 0.021 22.33 SpaiK 20 0.927 0.873 0.023 5.94 SpaiK-R 10 0.915 0.860 0.024 5.25 SPaiK 10 0.922 0.870 0.023 5.07 SPaiK 5 0.915 0.869 0.025 5.27 SPaiK 1 0.855 0.829 0.035 4.24 IDOT KronSVM 0.784 0.779 0.023 42.21 CGKronRLS 0.810 0.768 0.024 3.41 SPaiK 100 0.781 0.762 0.025 2.60 SpaiK 20 0.779 0.749 0.026 1.57 SpaiK-R 10 0.776 0.731 0.027 1.50 SPaiK 10 0.784 0.738 0.026 1.57 SPaiK 5 0.787 0.736 0.027 1.76 SPaiK 1 0.734 0.718 0.032 0.66 ODIT KronSVM 0.755 0.698 0.034 39.15 CGKronRLS 0.742 0.692 0.035 3.21 SPaiK 100 0.755 0.701 0.034 2.67 SpaiK 20 0.737 0.695 0.035 1.63 SpaiK-R 10 0.705 0.669 0.036 1.73 SPaiK 10 0.734 0.689 0.037 1.65 SPaiK 5 0.722 0.686 0.038 1.88 SPaiK 1 0.703 0.666 0.037 0.69 ODOT KronSVM 0.576 0.604 0.036 45.55 CGKronRLS 0.598 0.614 0.036 3.45 SPaiK 100 0.592 0.606 0.035 1.61 SpaiK 20 0.613 0.619 0.036 1.53 SpaiK-R 10 0.598 0.613 0.036 1.45 SPaiK 10 0.595 0.614 0.037 1.51 SPaiK 5 0.580 0.608 0.038 1.70 SPaiK 1 0.574 0.597 0.039 0.66 23 Table 8: Results in Enzymes. Setting Method C-index IC-index MSE CPU IDIT CGKronRLS 0.928 0.904 0.005 246.57 SPaiK 100 0.906 0.860 0.006 319.41 SpaiK 20 0.906 0.848 0.007 101.78 SpaiK-R 10 0.900 0.843 0.007 82.57 SPaiK 10 0.904 0.849 0.007 75.58 SPaiK 5 0.903 0.852 0.007 69.06 SPaiK 1 0.851 0.818 0.008 42.02 IDOT CGKronRLS 0.844 0.813 0.005 43.52 SPaiK 100 0.816 0.798 0.006 36.82 SpaiK 20 0.814 0.796 0.006 18.76 SpaiK-R 10 0.817 0.789 0.006 16.68 SPaiK 10 0.822 0.798 0.006 17.00 SPaiK 5 0.824 0.802 0.006 17.06 SPaiK 1 0.774 0.776 0.008 13.05 ODIT CGKronRLS 0.683 0.640 0.009 38.99 SPaiK 100 0.700 0.652 0.008 32.04 SpaiK 20 0.694 0.632 0.008 18.35 SpaiK-R 10 0.682 0.623 0.008 17.53 SPaiK 10 0.696 0.634 0.008 16.05 SPaiK 5 0.682 0.628 0.009 17.43 SPaiK 1 0.630 0.602 0.010 13.76 ODOT CGKronRLS 0.632 0.586 0.010 42.18 SPaiK 100 0.625 0.580 0.008 31.48 SpaiK 20 0.604 0.568 0.009 17.45 SpaiK-R 10 0.613 0.565 0.009 17.05 SPaiK 10 0.607 0.569 0.009 16.65 SPaiK 5 0.595 0.565 0.009 16.80 SPaiK 1 0.587 0.567 0.010 12.79 24